FOCUS #404: Service Subcategory (#519)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/columns/servicesubcategory.md

Reviewer: anti-malware tools.  Should be antimalware tools.

Author: Disagree.  Anti-malware (with a hyphen) is the industry-favored term.  Examples:

https://nordvpn.com/blog/antivirus-vs-anti-malware
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/getting-started-with-anti-malware-in-microsoft-defender-f5219ae5-abb7-4985-a149-1ec1bb304eda
https://maturitymodel.security.aws.dev/en/3.-efficient/antimalware/

Resolving with no action.

* Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose.

## Column ID

ServiceSubcategory

## Display Name

Service Subcategory

## Description

Secondary classification of the Service Category for a *service* based on its core function.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed Values |

Allowed values:

| Service Category          | Service Subcategory               | Service Subcategory Description                                                                                                                                                                        |
| ------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | AI and Machine Learning   | Bots                              | Automated performance of tasks such as customer service, data collection, and content moderation.                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 2: I disagree on the approach proposed here. The categories provided seem to be based on the high-level breakdown of the core types of services in the space and is not getting into how a user might use them. It matches the way we've done Compute, Database, Storage etc. Nothing is stopping us from adding AI Business Solutions at a time when that category becomes prominent. If that's the case already today, we can consider that right now. But that's not been the thought from anyone (as far as I recall) in 2+ months of discussing this in TF1, and various member and maintainer meetings.

> | AI and Machine Learning   | Bots                              | Automated performance of tasks such as customer service, data collection, and content moderation.                                                                                                      |

Author: Met with Michael and discussed the way forward: adding a new subcategory called `AI Platform` that creates a home for the Azure artificial intelligence services that didn't yet have a home.  Made change in a separate commit.  Resolving.

|                           | Generative AI                     | Creation of content like text, images, and music by learning patterns from existing data.                                                                                                              |
|                           | Machine Learning                  | Creation, training, and deployment of statistical algorithms that learn from and perform tasks based on data.                                                                                          |
|                           | Natural Language Processing       | Generation of human language, handling tasks like translation, sentiment analysis, and text summarization.                                                                                             |

> |                           | Other (AI and Machine Learning)   | AI and Machine Learning services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense if we want subcategory to be interpretable on its own.

Isn't this similar to what you later suggested for Storage - using "Block Storage" as the subcategory name instead of just "Block"?

> |                           | Other (AI and Machine Learning)   | AI and Machine Learning services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: Can you be specific on what the specific UX anti-pattern is? What string parsing are you worried about? There's absolutely no reason to do any parsing with this. If you want the service category, you can use that column. If you want the subcategory, you can use this. If you wanted to group all 'Other*' subcategories for some rare use case, it's a simple where ServiceSubcategory like 'Other %' clause.

Agree with Zach. The reason to do that was so anyone can report on purely the subcategory without needing to do any string concatenation. As someone that has built FinOps and general dashboards far more than I wish I had to, I think its more usable this way.

> |                           | Other (AI and Machine Learning)   | AI and Machine Learning services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                               |

Author: The addition of the category name in the `Other` subcategories was the subject of significant discussion, particularly in the Aug 13 TF1 call, and we issued a poll [here](https://f2-focus.slack.com/archives/C06MJPRAPCH/p1723565380029429) where consensus landed on its inclusion.  

As Zach and Udam have said, it's important to fulfill the use case of having subcategories be able to meaningfully live alongside each other on a report.  The loss of the category name alongside Other would eliminate the 1:M relationship between Category and Subcategory and require a practitioner to generate the composite context of both in order to meaningfully present data at the Subcategory level.

> |                           | Other (AI and Machine Learning)   | AI and Machine Learning services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                               |

Author: Michael and I discussed this topic today, and he's amenable to the pattern of `Other ($Category)`.  I appreciate your flexibility on this one, Michael!  I'm resolving this comment.

| Analytics                 | Analytics Platform                | Unified solution that combines technologies to meet enterprise needs across the entire analytics lifecycle.                                                                                            |
|                           | Business Intelligence             | Semantic models, dashboards, reports, and data visualizations to track performance and identify trends.                                                                                                |
|                           | Data Processing                   | Integration and transformation tasks to prepare data for analysis.                                                                                                                                     |

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 3: I think it belongs here - this is services like: https://aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/

What type of search services do you think belong in Web?

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 2: I agree that Search is ambiguous when used independently. Web would not be the right place for this class of services. They're definitely analytics services. I suggest we either:
1. get rid of it and let services like Open search go into Analytics Platform
2. Rename to Search Analytics

If others have opinions, vote 1️⃣ or 2️⃣  (search for 'one' or 'two' in your emoji search) or 3️⃣ if neither work for you.

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Author: I was hopeful that we could create a single search subcategory that would house all of the following:

- AWS Cognitive Search
- AWS CloudSearch
- AWS Elasticsearch
- AWS Kendra
- Azure AI Search (formerly Cognitive Search)
- GCP Vertex AI Search

My original proposal was that search belongs in `AI & ML`, but per feedback from the Aug 20 TF1 call, we moved it to `Analytics`.  Placing the above services under `Web`, to my mind, would not be expected by the average practitioner.  If you see otherwise, please let me know specifically how you would categorize / subcategories the above services.

I am also open to creating search subcategories in a couple of different categories (please propose a suggestion if you think so), but my first preference was to keep all search capability in one place.

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Author: Discussed with Michael; this one requires further conversation with the task force and CSP reps.  We both prefer to keep all Search services in the same single place for the practitioner’s sake, but Microsoft has Azure AI Services under `Web`, and it will either need to stay there or move to `AI and Machine Learning`; putting it in `Analytics` simply won’t do.

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 4: To clarify the "simply won't do" comment, this is based on where the Azure Search team believes it fits. 

By creating explicit subcategories with the goal of aligning across providers, FOCUS is making a statement that search services belong in a specific category. I wasn't originally approaching the categorization that strongly, but I do feel that makes sense assuming we have data to back up the decisions. The point of discussing with other providers was to at least understand why they placed search services wherever they are today and attempt to make a slightly more informed decision from service owners. That said, I'm confident we can logic this out. Initially, I didn't understand why it would relate to Analytics since "finding assets" is not about "analyzing data", but I might have a guess. I'd love to learn more.

> |                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

|                           | Streaming Analytics               | Real-time data stream processes to detect patterns, trends, and anomalies as they occur.                                                                                                               |

> |                           | Other (Analytics)                 | Analytics services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                             |

Author: Aligned on path forward here, which is to leverage existing subcategories.  Resolving.

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 5: @flanakin its not clear which category you are referring to here, is this Business Applications?

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Nothing stops us from introducing these or a subset of these in 1.2 along with broader support for the marketplace services. We're trying to keep these to 
1. What maps to current CSP services right now to try to scope this work
2. What we have strong conviction on. Shawn has a whole list of things we've removed so far that make sense but we dont need to go out and define right now. It's worse to define something without doing broad research and have to remove/change/rename than to not introduce this something so it will go into 'Other ($Category)'. 
 
Ideally, many of these hopefully can come to us from our user groups and providers and the group can discuss in depth add support. Think of this as an initial starting point. This and service category will need to keep extending support for new areas each release (hopefully, rarely removing/renaming/changing).

You'll see me refer to this design goal in several comments.

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 4: FYI - Shawn and I simplified these down to just:
- `Business Management`
- `Productivity and Collaboration`

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                    |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

| Compute                   | Containers                        | Management and orchestration of containerized compute platforms.                                                                                                                                       |
|                           | End User Computing                | Virtualized desktop infrastructure and device / endpoint management.                                                                                                                                   |

> |                           | Quantum                           | Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics.                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 2: Are you referring specifically to line 50 OR 47-50? 

I think HPC will included in many services. Virtual machine and Container-type services have many HPC offerings included (Amazon EC2, Azure batch etc.). 

I could be convinced that we should not create a Quantum subcategory now and delay but it seems like these have some traction on all providers and are used for a very specific reason when compared to general HPC offerings that fit into many other categories.

> |                           | Quantum                           | Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics.                                                                                                                            |

Author: I agree with Udam's point that there are many services that include high-performance SKUs, so having a `High Performance` carveout could be misleading.

I could absolutely be convinced to cut Quantum for now.  I concede that it's quite specific.

> |                           | Quantum                           | Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics.                                                                                                                            |

Author: Aligned on path forward here, which is to leverage existing subcategories.  Resolving.

> |                           | Serverless Compute                | Enablement of compute capabilities without provisioning or managing servers.                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: Functions is a marketing name. Serverless compute captures the types of services we're trying to capture perfectly. 

Can you elaborate what you mean by 'nearly every PaaS offering could fit into it'? Are the core function of those services to provide 'compute'? I would think not since they're PaaS. We debated this already but IMO, its not relevant if databases for example user serverless compute. They're under the Database category and aren't getting captured in Compute for a service-level. We're not mixing up SKU level categorization with this (SQL server cost would only be in Database / Relational - not in compute/storage/network/dabaase etc. even though that service uses all of these).

> |                           | Serverless Compute                | Enablement of compute capabilities without provisioning or managing servers.                                                                                                                           |

Author: Aligned on path forward, which is to leave as-is.  Resolving.

|                           | Virtual Machines                  | Computing environments created by abstracting resources from physical hardware.                                                                                                                        |

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: @arrarama mentioned this as well above. 

@salpaysenturus's comment is that at in Azure, AWS have bare metal instances under EC2 and Azure VM. Therefore there's no single service that is bare metal only. Would it make sense to move to a 'Compute Instances' subcategory with a description like: 
'Computing instances created by abstracting resources from physical hardware or as direct .'

OR Compute Machine or Compute Server with a description like:
'Managed virtual or physical compute machines/servers'

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: If anything doesn't fit existing categories, they fit well into the 'Other ($Category)' subcategory 😄 

In the case of Spring Apps, I don't think that's a compute service. They seem similar to Elastic Beanstalk type services in AWS where you combine a bunch of services (compute, db, networking etc.) to host applications. This may be something we need to introduce as a top level category or find another place. For now, I'm ok with not supporting this explicitly and adding support based on need.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: Again, I think we're mixing up components of services you might get charged for?

What are some examples of services you're trying to capture here?

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: This was debated for a long time in many forums (TF1, maintainer, member). 

I think the final decision was it would go in Other depending on how broadly the discount instrument applied. If it was specific to some category, e.g. Compute / Virtual Machines, then it would go there. If it was a general compute or database RI/SP, would go into Other ($Category). 

@ijurica @salpaysenturus please correct if I'm off base here.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: First off, I'll copy my reply to [@arrarama's bare-metal comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/519#discussion_r1734997909) here:

> we focused on defining those subcategories that have the most commonality across all providers. In the specific case of bare metal, it could be misleading to maintain such a subcategory, given that it would not be inclusive of bare metal activity across all providers. For example, AWS bare metal instance types live under the EC2 service, which is categorized as `Virtual Machines`.
> 
> It is my belief that the definition of a _SKU_ taxonomy will handle for practitioner analyses such as these, and the Service taxonomy cannot provide that kind of fine grain.
> 
> As it stands, there would be no appropriate subcategory for OCI Bare Metal Servers, and so it would go into `Compute > Other (Compute)`. Please keep in mind that there are many, many services across all the providers that will not have a subcategory home in the first version of this taxonomy, as a guiding principle here is to undercategorize rather than overcategorize and allow ourselves (and the community) to advocate for adding missing subcategories over time.

Given that context (which Udam summarized above), I'm certainly open to changing the name of `Virtual Machines` to be inclusive of bare-metal.

How does `Provisioned Compute` feel?  I would want this to live alongside `Serverless Compute` to delineate between, say, EC2 vs Lambda.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: That is correct.  The first draft included a `Crossfunctional` category and category-specific `Commitment` subcategories to handle for cross-category items.  This was very heavily discussed, particularly on the Jul 23 TF1 and Aug 8 Member calls, and the outcome for commitments was:

1) Add to the relevant Subcategory where possible (e.g. RDS RI goes to `Compute > Virtual Machines`); 
2) Add to a Category-specific Uncategorized Subcategory where possible (e.g. Compute SP goes to `Compute > Other (Compute)`); 
3) Do not categorize or subcatgorize where it crosses Categories (e.g. OCI Credits goes to `Other > Other (Other)`).

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: We discussed a place for items such as AWS Elastic Beanstalk, AWS Lightsail, and Azure Spring Apps.  I did not hear a consensus (some said net-new category, some said `Compute`, some said `Web`, some said `Business Applications`), and so I did not pursue this further, as the providers could choose any of the existing categories and not subcategorize.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Discussed at length on the Sep 3 TF1 call; decided to keep bare-metal under `Virtual Machines` with no name change.  Resolving.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Aligned on the arrangement described in my previous comment, which does not attempt to categorize or subcategorize Commitment Discounts.  Resolving.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Aligned on path forward for Compute; no action on this one.  Resolving.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Discussed this further, and we need to revisit as a group in the next TF1 meeting.  Current proposal is either to expand the scope of `Compute > Serverless Compute` to be inclusive of such services or 2) add a new subcategory.  But Spring Apps will have to stay in Compute from Microsoft's perspective, so the subcategory ideally lives there.

> |                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Discussed in today's TF1 meeting; landed on adding to `Web > Web Platforms`.  Resolving.

> | Databases                 | Caching                           | Low-latency and high-throughput access to frequently accessed data.                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Sounds like a good idea. Could you make some suggestions?

> | Databases                 | Caching                           | Low-latency and high-throughput access to frequently accessed data.                                                                                                                                    |

Author: This was scrubbed in a separate commit.  Resolving.

|                           | NoSQL                             | Unstructured or semi-structured data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                                                                                |
|                           | Ledger                            | Immutable and transparent databases to record tamper-proof and cryptographically secure transactions.                                                                                                  |
|                           | Time Series                       | Time-stamped data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                                                                                                   |
|                           | Other (Databases)                 | Database services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                              |

> | Developer Tools           | Other (Developer Tools)           | All Developer Tools services.                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above. These seem like a good start to improve in 1.2. Nothing stops us from diving deeper into these but this shouldn't block 1.1 for now. These aren't going to have lots of cost for most users.

While these seem like good suggestions, if you ask 10 people, you'll get many variations. We need to do that consensus-building and release a list we're confident in.

> | Developer Tools           | Other (Developer Tools)           | All Developer Tools services.                                                                                                                                                                          |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

> | Identity                  | Other (Identity)                  | All Identity services.                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above. Not a lot of cost going into these. Lets come back to this.

> | Identity                  | Other (Identity)                  | All Identity services.                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

| Integration               | API Management                    | Creation, publishing, and management of application programming interfaces.                                                                                                                            |
|                           | Messaging                         | Asynchronous communication between distributed applications.                                                                                                                                           |
|                           | Workflow Automation               | Design, execution, and management of business processes and workflows.                                                                                                                                 |
|                           | Other (Integration)               | Integration services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                           |

> | Internet of Things        | Other (Internet of Things)        | All Internet of Things (IoT) services.                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above. Not a lot of cost going into these. Lets come back to this when we have time to drive consensus around these.

> | Internet of Things        | Other (Internet of Things)        | All Internet of Things (IoT) services.                                                                                                                                                                 |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

> | Management and Governance | Architecture                      | Planning, design, and construction of software systems.                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: I would be ok with a different term than Architecture but not seeing Resource Management as a good option here.

Anything in between that you might suggest? Resource Management seems so generic that if I saw it by itself, I would have no idea what goes in that or what doesn't.

> | Management and Governance | Architecture                      | Planning, design, and construction of software systems.                                                                                                                                                |

Author: We aligned on the path forward with this category, per other changes.  Resolving with no action.

|                           | Compliance                        | Adherence to regulatory standards and industry best practices.                                                                                                                                         |
|                           | Cost Management                   | Monitoring and controlling expenses of systems and services.                                                                                                                                           |
|                           | Data Governance                   | Management of the availability, usability, integrity, and security of data.                                                                                                                            |

> |                           | Disaster Recovery                 | Plans and procedures that ensure systems and services can recover from disruptions.                                                                                                                    |

Author: Handled in a separate commit.  Resolving.

|                           | Observability                     | Monitoring, logging, and tracing of data to track the performance and health of systems.                                                                                                               |
|                           | Support                           | Assistance and expertise supplied by providers.                                                                                                                                                        |

> |                           | Other (Management and Governance) | Management and governance services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 2: Again, the idea wasn't to capture every service under every provider. We want to start with a set we can stand behind and then expand (with minimal disruption to existing mappings - unless it's other).

> |                           | Other (Management and Governance) | Management and governance services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                             |

Author: Agreed to add `Endpoint Management` as a new subcategory, which I have added in a separate commit.  Resolving.

> | Media                     | Other (Media)                     | All Media services.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Same comments as above. Can come post 1.1 after spending lots of time driving consensus (hopefully based on some signals from customers as well)

> | Media                     | Other (Media)                     | All Media services.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

> | Migration                 | Other (Migration)                 | All Migration services.                                                                                                                                                                                |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

> | Mobile                    | Other (Mobile)                    | All Mobile services.                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: Same comments as above. Can come post 1.1 after spending lots of time driving consensus (hopefully based on some signals from customers as well)

> | Mobile                    | Other (Mobile)                    | All Mobile services.                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

> | Multicloud                | Other (Multicloud)                | All Multicloud services.                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: Same comments as above. Can come post 1.1 after spending lots of time driving consensus (hopefully based on some signals from customers as well)

> | Multicloud                | Other (Multicloud)                | All Multicloud services.                                                                                                                                                                               |

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

| Networking                | Content Delivery                  | Distribution of digital content using a network of servers (CDNs).                                                                                                                                     |
|                           | Load Balancing                    | Distribution of incoming network traffic across multiple servers to prevent server overload.                                                                                                           |
|                           | Network Management                | Configuration, monitoring, and troubleshooting of network devices.                                                                                                                                     |

> |                           | Network Security                  | Protection from unauthorized network access and cyber threats using firewalls, VPNs, and anti-malware tools.                                                                                           |

Author: The group discussed the example of firewalls in depth on the Jul 30 TF1 call.  Where would the practitioner expect to see firewall activity?  The consensus was that it belonged under `Networking`, even though it is very much a security measure.  In that conversation, I confirmed that the group preferred to have this exception in our set of subcategories.

What are some specific examples of other services that you believe will run counter to this setup?

> |                           | Network Security                  | Protection from unauthorized network access and cyber threats using firewalls, VPNs, and anti-malware tools.                                                                                           |

Author: Aligned on this arrangement; no action.  Resolving.

> |                           | Network Transfer                  | Movement of data between systems, locations, or formats via data migration, synchronization, and replication tasks.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 4: "Network Transfer" doesn't sound right. We're not transferring networks. We're transferring data across the networks. We should stick to more common terms that will be easier to understand and call this `Data Transfer`. "Network" is already stated by the service category. We could also use `Network Connectivity` but "Data Transfer" is more aligned with how people think about it today.

Author: Discussed and agreed to change to `Network Connectivity`, which I have done in a separate commit.  Resolving.

> |                           | Other (Networking)                | Networking services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 4: We need a `Communication Services` subcategory for telephony.

Author: `Telecommunications` (e.g. Packet Core, Voice Core) and `Satellite` (e.g. Ground Station) were defined subcategories in my first draft of `Networking`, when I had very granularly defined its subcategories.  Feedback was to condense to a shorter list.  So, I'm open to adding back, either as two subcategories or one, but I would like to discuss and confirm with the group first.

> |                           | Other (Networking)                | Networking services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 2: That seems like it would go across many here. You can have Network Infrastructure for management, security and transfer. I don't think it would help to add something so generic where it would further confuse providers on which one to use. As is, it's hard enough to pick one of these for a given service in some scenarios.

> |                           | Other (Networking)                | Networking services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                            |

Author: Please provide examples of services that would belong in such a subcategory.

> | Security                  | CSPM                              | Cloud Security Posture Management (CSPM) tools that help organizations configure, monitor, and improve their cloud security.                                                                           |

Author: Agreed to go with `Security Posture Management`, which is not an industry-standard term without the word "Cloud", but is certainly more future-proof for the spec, given that it would be inclusive of non-cloud services down the road.  Made the change in a separate commit; resolving.

> | Security                  | Credentials                       | Information used to authenticate users and systems, including secrets, certificates, tokens, and other keys.                                                                                           |

Author: Discussed on the Sep 3 TF1 call; majority opinion was that `Secret Management` is the most inclusive and self-documenting of the various options.  Changed in a separate commit; resolving.

| Security                  | SIEM                              | Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) systems collect and analyze security data from various sources to automatically detect and respond to threats.                                        |
| Security                  | Threat Detection                  | Identification of potential security threats and vulnerabilities within a cloud environment using various techniques, including anomaly detection, signature-based detection, and behavioral analysis. |

> | Security                  | Other (Security)                  | Security services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                              |

Author: Aligned on path forward for Networking per other suggestions.  No action on this one; resolving.

| Storage                   | Backup                            | Secondary storage to protect against data loss.                                                                                                                                                        |
| Storage                   | Block                             | High performance, low latency storage that provides random access.                                                                                                                                     |
| Storage                   | File                              | Scalable, sharable storage for file-based data.                                                                                                                                                        |

> | Storage                   | Object                            | Highly available, durable storage for unstructured data.                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: What are examples of storage services that would go into General Purpose Storage? Block, FIle, and Object are very different types of services under the storage umbrella afaik (Spent time building these at AWS and later building optimizations recos for these as a FinOps vendor. Always saw them as different but could be missing something here).

> | Storage                   | Object                            | Highly available, durable storage for unstructured data.                                                                                                                                               |

Author: Aligned on path forward, which was to add `Storage Platform` to handle for Azure services like Storage Accounts that offer multiple storage types.  Added in a separate commit; resolving.

> | Storage                   | Storage Transfer                  | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: I think that makes it very generic where this is trying to capture a specific type of service that's designed for offline transfer of data.

> | Storage                   | Storage Transfer                  | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                                                                                                  |

Author: Discussed and agreed to change this to `Data Transfer`, which is more general, but no longer has a conflict with `Networking > Network Transfer`, which was renamed to `Network Connectivity`.  Made this change in a separate commit; resolving.

> | Storage                   | Other (Storage)                   | Storage services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: What are some examples for Storage management and Data Management across the CSPs? If any of these aren't prominent, we're better off leaving them to fall into Other and then define it when we need to.

> | Storage                   | Other (Storage)                   | Storage services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 5: @flanakin i would expect management services even those for storage management to fit into the management and governance service category, is there a driving need to split them?

> | Storage                   | Other (Storage)                   | Storage services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

Author: Discussed and aligned on path forward for Storage category.  No action on this one, per other changes.  Resolving.

> | Web                       | Other (Web)                       | All Web services.                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 4: We need to break this down more. There's a lot in this space. More than storage.
- `Application Infrastructure`
- `Application Services`
- `Domain Management`
- `Frameworks and Templates`

Reviewer 2: Same comments as above. Can come post 1.1 after spending lots of time driving consensus (hopefully based on some signals from customers as well)

Author: Aligned on path forward per discussions and meetings over the past week, and a path forward has been committed separately.  Resolving.

# Service Subcategory

> The Service Subcategory is a further classification of the Service Category for a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  

Reviewer 6: Is it really true that we are aiding analysis across providers if all providers are adhering to the same set of standard values. Isn't the use case more that it is aiding a practitioner in analyzing their cloud spend across specific workload types?

Author: I would argue: yes, absolutely! I think it's both/and instead of either/or. The goal is to aid a practitioner in analyzing their cloud spend and usage for specific workload types across providers.  Do you agree with that statement?

Reviewer 6: "analyzing their cloud spend and usage for specific workload types across providers" - if we can update that portion to say when used in conjunction with the Provider column, then I would agree.

Author: Alright.  How about this:

```suggestion
The Service Subcategory is a secondary classification of the Service Category for a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function. The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing spend and usage for specific workload types across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  
```

Reviewer 6: Looks good.

|                           | Natural Language Processing       | Generation of human language, handling tasks like translation, sentiment analysis, and text summarization.                                                                                             |
|                           | Other (AI and Machine Learning)   | AI and Machine Learning services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                               |
| Analytics                 | Analytics Platform                | Unified solution that combines technologies to meet enterprise needs across the entire analytics lifecycle.                                                                                            |
|                           | Business Intelligence             | Semantic models, dashboards, reports, and data visualizations to track performance and identify trends.                                                                                                |

> |                           | Data Processing                   | Integration and transformation tasks to prepare data for analysis.                                                                                                                                     |

Author: We discussed this name at length in the Jul 30 and Aug 13 TF1 calls, and this is the name the group coalesced around.  I would like to avoid use of the word `Integration` in this subcategory name if we can help it, given that we heavily debated whether this subcategory belongs underneath the `Integration` Category, and we aligned on putting it in `Analytics`, so I want to keep some distance.

Please let me know if it's acceptable to you to keep it as `Data Processing`, and if not, please suggest an alternative that avoids use of the term `Integration`.

> |                           | Data Processing                   | Integration and transformation tasks to prepare data for analysis.                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: Data Processing, to me, has a lot of overlap with Analytics Platform

> |                           | Data Processing                   | Integration and transformation tasks to prepare data for analysis.                                                                                                                                     |

Author: Keeping as Data Processing; resolving with no action.

|                           | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                                                                                                         |
|                           | Streaming Analytics               | Real-time data stream processes to detect patterns, trends, and anomalies as they occur.                                                                                                               |
|                           | Other (Analytics)                 | Analytics services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                             |
| Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | Compute                   | Containers                        | Automated management of containerized applications.                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Compute                   | Containers                        | Management and orchestration of containerized compute platforms.                                                                                                                                                   |
```
This sounds more to me like a Elastic Beanstalk type because it says ‘Applications’. In this case, could we say something along the lines of management and orchestration of containerized compute platforms?

> | Compute                   | Containers                        | Management and orchestration of containerized compute platforms.                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 6: Why isn't Bare Metal a sub-category of Compute?

Author: we focused on defining those subcategories that have the most commonality across all providers.  In the specific case of bare metal, it could be misleading to maintain such a subcategory, given that it would not be inclusive of bare metal activity across all providers.  For example, AWS bare metal instance types live under the EC2 service, which is categorized as `Virtual Machines`.

It is my belief that the definition of a _SKU_ taxonomy will handle for practitioner analyses such as these, and the _Service_ taxonomy cannot provide that kind of fine grain.

As it stands, there would be no appropriate subcategory for OCI Bare Metal Servers. Please keep in mind that there are many, many services across all the providers that will not have a subcategory home in the first version of this taxonomy, as a guiding principle here is to undercategorize rather than overcategorize and allow ourselves (and the community) to advocate for adding missing subcategories over time.

Author: Discussed this at length on the Tue Sep 3 TF1 call.  Group decided to subcategorize bare-metal under `Virtual Machines` and leave the name as-is.  Resolving.

> |                           | End User Computing                | Desktop virtualization, mobile computing, and self-service analytics.                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | End User Computing                | Desktop virtualization, device and endpoint management.                                                                                                                                  |
```
Self-service analytics seems out of place to me

Author: Fair enough.  But your suggestion now reads as a sentence fragment.  How about:
```suggestion
|                           | End User Computing                | Virtualized desktop infrastructure and device / endpoint management.                                                                                                                                  |
```

|                           | Quantum                           | Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics.                                                                                                                            |

> |                           | Serverless Compute                | Facilitates building and running applications without managing servers.                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Serverless Compute                | Enabling compute capabilities without provisioning or managing servers.                                                                                                                                |
```

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | Serverless Compute                | Enablement of compute capabilities without provisioning or managing servers.                                                                                                                                |
```

|                           | Virtual Machines                  | Computing environments created by abstracting resources from physical hardware.                                                                                                                        |
|                           | Other (Compute)                   | Compute services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                               |

> | Databases                 | Caching                           | Frequently accessed data housed in a temporary storage area for quick retrieval.                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Databases                 | Caching                           | Low-latency and high-throughput access to frequently accessed data.                                                                                                                       |
```

> |                           | Data Warehouse                    | Centralized repository that stores large volumes of structured data to facilitate analytical use cases.                                                                                                |

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | Data Warehouse                    | Big data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                                                |
```

> |                           | Relational                        | Data organized into tables with rows and columns to facilitate transactional use cases.                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Relational                        | Storage and querying capabilities optimized for structured data.                                                                                                                |
```

Author: Not onboard with this one.  Don't want to use the word `storage` to describe something in the `Databases` category, given that we have a `Storage` category.

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | Relational                        | Structured data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                                                                |
```

> |                           | NoSQL                             | Unstructured or semi-structured data to facilitate use cases where data models change frequently.                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | NoSQL                             | Storage and querying capabilities optimized for unstructured or semi-structured data.                                                                                                      |
```

Author: Same deal as Caching.

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | NoSQL                             | Unstructured or semi-structured data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                                                      |
```

> |                           | Ledger                            | Transparent, immutable, and cryptographically verifiable transaction log used in applications requiring a secure and auditable record of transactions.                                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Ledger                            | Immutable and transparent databases for tamper-evident and cryptographically secure records of transactions and data                                                 |
```

Author: `Tamper-evident`?  I've not heard this term, and Googling it suggests `tamper-proof` might be the better term.  How about:

```suggestion
|                           | Ledger                            | Immutable and transparent databases to record tamper-proof and cryptographically secure transactions.                                                 |
```

> |                           | Time Series                       | Data store optimized for storing and querying time-stamped data to facilitate use cases where tracking data changes over time is crucial.                                                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Time Series                       | Storage and querying capabilities optimized for time-stamped data.                                                              |
```

Author: Again, not feeling the word storage.

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | Time Series                       | Time-stamped data storage and querying capabilities.                                                              |
```

|                           | Other (Databases)                 | Database services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                              |
| Developer Tools           | Other (Developer Tools)           | All Developer Tools services.                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Identity                  | Other (Identity)                  | All Identity services.                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Integration               | API Management                    | Creation, publishing, and governance of application programming interfaces that facilitate communication between software systems.                                                                     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Integration               | API Management                    | Creation, publishing, and management of application programming interfaces.                                                                     |
```

|                           | Messaging                         | Asynchronous communication between distributed applications.                                                                                                                                           |

> |                           | Workflow Automation               | Use of software to complete orchestration tasks and activities without the need for human input.                                                                                                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Workflow Automation               | Design, execution, and management of business processes and workflows.                                                                                                       |
```

Author: I was really trying to avoid the use of the term `workflow`.  Could we go with:

```suggestion
|                           | Workflow Automation               | Design, execution, and management of repeatable business processes.                                                                                                       |
```

|                           | Other (Integration)               | Integration services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                           |
| Internet of Things        | Other (Internet of Things)        | All Internet of Things (IoT) services.                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Management and Governance | Administration                    | Management and maintenance of cloud systems.                                                                                                                                                           |
> |                           | Architecture                      | Planning, design, and construction of cloud systems.                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Management and Governance | Architecture                      | Planning, design, and construction of software systems.                                                                                                                                                   |
```
The category 'administration' and the description just seem so generic. Lets add this later if needed?

Reviewer 2: Also added 'software' instead of 'cloud'

|                           | Compliance                        | Adherance to regulatory standards and industry best practices.                                                                                                                                         |

> |                           | Cost Management                   | Monitoring and controlling expenses of cloud systems.                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Cost Management                   | Monitoring and controlling expenses of systems and services.                                                                                                                                                  |
```

Author: Is `cloud` a verboten term in the spec?  Based on your comments, I assume `systems and services` is preferred?  It would be helpful to add that to the editorial guidelines, or maybe it is and I didn't notice.

|                           | Data Governance                   | Management of the availability, usability, integrity, and security of data.                                                                                                                            |

> |                           | Disaster Recovery                 | Plans and procedures that ensure cloud systems can recover quickly from disruptions.                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Disaster Recovery                 | Plans and procedures that ensure systems and services can recover from disruptions.                                                                                                                   |
```

|                           | Observability                     | Monitoring, logging, and tracing of data to track the performance and health of systems.                                                                                                               |

> |                           | Support                           | Planning, advice, and expertise supplied by cloud providers.                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Support                           | Assistance and expertise supplied by providers to enable customers.                                                                                                                                           |
```

Author: To enable customers... doing what?  I would prefer to end that sentence with an action or actions customers take.

Author: ```suggestion
|                           | Support                           | Assistance and expertise supplied by providers.                                                                                                                                           |
```

|                           | Credentials                       | Information used to authenticate users and systems, including secrets, certificates, tokens, and other keys.                                                                                           |
|                           | SIEM                              | Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) systems collect and analyze security data from various sources to automatically detect and respond to threats.                                        |
|                           | Threat Detection                  | Identification of potential security threats and vulnerabilities within a cloud environment using various techniques, including anomaly detection, signature-based detection, and behavioral analysis. |
|                           | Other (Security)                  | Security services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                              |

> | Storage                   | Backups                           | Copies of data.                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Storage                   | Backups                           | Data protection capabilities                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

Author: We need this description to describe something about duplication of data.

Author: ```suggestion
| Storage                   | Backup                           | Secondary storage to protect against data loss.                                                                                                                                                                                         |
```

> |                           | Bulk Transfer                     | Movement of large volumes of data between systems or locations.                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Data Transfer Appliances         | Secure, high-speed, and offline data transfer from one location to another                                                                                                                                 |
```

Author: We need to delineate from `Networking > Data Transfer` with our name.  So how about:

How about:
```suggestion
|                           | Storage Transfer                     | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                                                                                                                        |
```

> |                           | Disk                              | Persistent storage for operating systems, applications, and user data.                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Blob                              | High performance, low latency storage that provides random access.                                                                                                                                |
```

> |                           | Files                             | Hierarchical structure of directories for storing documents, images, and other types of data.                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | File                             | Scalable, sharable storage for file-based data.                                                                                                          |
```

> |                           | Object Storage                    | Highly scalable data management architecture for storing large amounts of unstructured data.                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Object                    | Highly available, durable storage for unstructured data.                                                                                                           |
```

# Service Subcategory

> The Service Subcategory is a more granular classification of the Service Category of a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  The Service Subcategory is a child of the Service Category, and each Service Subcategory value must have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* should have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 

Author: ```suggestion
The Service Subcategory is a further classification of the Service Category of a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  
```

> The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.

Author: ```suggestion
The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.  Each Service Subcategory value MUST have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 
```

## Column ID

ServiceSubcategory

## Display Name

Service Subcategory

## Description

Second-highest-level classification of a *service* based on its core function.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed Values |

Allowed values:

> | AI and Machine Learning   | Generative AI                     | Creation of content like text, images, and music by learning patterns from existing data.                                                                                                                                                  |
> | ------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

Reviewer 2: This makes the first row the header - which in this case is not the header, its the first data row.
```suggestion
| Service Category              | Service Subcategory       | Description                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| AI and Machine Learning   | Generative AI                     | Creation of content like text, images, and music by learning patterns from existing data.                                                                                                                                                  |
```

| Networking                | Network Management                | Configuration, monitoring, and troubleshooting of network devices.                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                           | Network Security                  | Protection from unauthorized network access and cyber threats using firewalls, VPNs, and anti-malware tools.                                                                                                                               |
|                           | Content Delivery                  | Distribution of digital content quickly and reliably using a network of servers (CDNs).                                                                                                                                                    |

> |                           | Load Balancing                    | Distribution of incoming network traffic across multiple servers to prevent server overload.                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 7: "to prevent server overload" seems unnecessarily prescriptive.

Author: Fair enough!  Switching to:

```suggestion
|                           | Load Balancing                    | Distribution of incoming network traffic across multiple servers.                                                                                                                                               |
```

# Service Subcategory

> The Service Subcategory is a further classification of the Service Category for a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Service Subcategory is a secondary classification of the Service Category for a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function. The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  
```

> The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.  Each Service Subcategory value MUST have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 

Reviewer 4: Can this be switched to a bulleted list?

Author: You bet.

```suggestion
- The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. 
- This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.  
- Each Service Subcategory value MUST have one and only one Service Category parent. 
- Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 
```

> The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.  Each Service Subcategory value MUST have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values. Each Service Subcategory value MUST have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* SHOULD have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 
```

## Column ID

ServiceSubcategory

## Display Name

Service Subcategory

## Description

> Further classification of the Service Category for a *service* based on its core function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondary classification of the Service Category for a *service* based on its core function.
```

Author: Rolled this suggestion into a parallel suggestion.  Resolving.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed Values |

> Allowed values:

Reviewer 4: Can we change this to be a separate table for each service category? The Unit Format attribute does this. The empty cells and rows feel like added noise and are making this harder to review, given how big the list is.

I'm going to hold off on this PR for the time being as I have many comments and don't want to reapply them later.

Author: I'm happy to eliminate the blank rows between Categories, which I have now done.  (I found it to be slightly more readable, but I can totally see that not everyone may feel that way, and it was a non-standard composition anyway.)

I'm more hesitant to break the Categories into separate tables, given that the column composition for all rows is the same (unlike Unit Format, where the column headers differ).  Also, I believe it's useful to keep all the possible allowed values in one table for the purposes of spec maintainability, provider utility, and practitioner reference.  I would prefer to discuss further if you feel this needs to happen.

Reviewer 2: I tend to agree that without empty rows but keeping in one table seems like the right approach. Is there any value in populating the service category for each row rather than only on the first row and leaving the rest empty? If it doesn't help, ignore the suggestion.

Reviewer 8: Considering that I don’t know how it will be formatted (in terms of page breaks) in the PDF version, I lean towards providing the Service Category in each row, but I don’t feel strongly about it.

Reviewer 4: Splitting them is about making it easier to comprehend. There's no value with a massive table in a PDF file. Smaller tables, regardless of column alignment is easier to work with. Regardless, this isn't accessible, so at a bare minimum, the first column has to be populated for every row.

Author: I have now added the Service Category to every Service Subcategory row.  Please confirm that this is sufficient for approval!

Reviewer 2: Adding 20 (and in the future a lot more) tables doesn't seem like a good idea. A single table may not be ideal but it seems like the best approach. We can revisit in the future if there's a compelling reason.

Author: Resolving this comment per the above.  Will leave as-is and address in a future consistency PR.

| Analytics                 | Analytics Platforms               | Unified solution that combines technologies to meet enterprise needs across the entire analytics lifecycle.          |
| Analytics                 | Business Intelligence             | Semantic models, dashboards, reports, and data visualizations to track performance and identify trends.              |
| Analytics                 | Data Processing                   | Integration and transformation tasks to prepare data for analysis.                                                   |
| Analytics                 | Search                            | Discovery of information by indexing and retrieving data from various sources.                                       |
| Analytics                 | Streaming Analytics               | Real-time data stream processes to detect patterns, trends, and anomalies as they occur.                             |
| Analytics                 | Other (Analytics)                 | Analytics services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                           |

> | Business Applications     | Business Functions                | Tools that pertain to specific departments or subject areas within an organization.                                  |

Author: It's an important subcategory to delineate from Productivity and Collaboration, but a solid name is hard, I agree.

Consider the subcategory breakdown AWS maintains on their Business Applications page [here](https://aws.amazon.com/business-applications/).  Their subcategories are Communication Developer Services, Productivity (our Productivity and Collaboration subcategory combines those), and... Business Applications.  They punted on a more specific name for services like AWS Supply Chain, which is fine, but we need one.

I'm happy to workshop the name further, but this subcategory should remain.

> | Business Applications     | Business Functions                | Tools that pertain to specific departments or subject areas within an organization.                                  |

Reviewer 4: @udam-f2 What name would you propose to identify products and services to help companies manage their business (e.g., finance, HR, supply chain)? These are distinctly separate from "Productivity and Collaboration", which facilitate work, but aren't about managing a business.

I would argue `Business Management` aligns better with some of our other "Management" subcategories, but I'm open to other options. But let's please try to move forward with suggestions rather than put up a wall with no path forward. Unless you're saying that you don't think products and services that facilitate managing the business are useful to categorize separately. If that's the case, we may have to agree to disagree and lean in on what will give practitioners the best experience for now, which we can revisit based on feedback.

> | Business Applications     | Business Functions                | Tools that pertain to specific departments or subject areas within an organization.                                  |

Author: Discussed in the 9/16 Maintainer meeting; will strike for now.

| Databases                 | Ledger Databases                  | Immutable and transparent databases to record tamper-proof and cryptographically secure transactions.                |
| Databases                 | NoSQL Databases                   | Unstructured or semi-structured data storage and querying capabilities.                                              |
| Databases                 | Relational Databases              | Structured data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                   |
| Databases                 | Time Series Databases             | Time-stamped data storage and querying capabilities.                                                                 |
| Databases                 | Other (Databases)                 | Database services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                            |
| Developer Tools           | Developer Platforms               | Integrated environments that facilitate multiple development needs.                                                  |

> | Developer Tools           | Deployment                        | Tools and services that support deploying code for software and systems.                                             |

Author: Want to avoid acronyms if possible.  Don't love `Integration and Deployment` because it starts with "Integration", which is a category name.  How do you feel about `Continuous Integration and Deployment`?
```suggestion
| Developer Tools           | Continuous Integration and Deployment                        | CI/CD tools and services that support building and deploying code for software and systems.           |
```

> | Developer Tools           | Deployment                        | Tools and services that support deploying code for software and systems.                                             |

Reviewer 4: While I prefer the simplicity of "Deployment", I'm fine with this. 

Is there anything that falls into the "Deployment" bucket that is not explicitly CI/CD? (Side note: Copilot prefers "Continuous Integration and Deployment" as a more holistic name.)

> | Developer Tools           | Deployment                        | Tools and services that support deploying code for software and systems.                                             |

Author: Cool!  Committing and resolving this one.

> | Developer Tools           | Development                       | Tools and services that support authoring code for software and systems.                                             |

Author: This subcategory is meant to be inclusive of both SCM and IDEs.  I am happy to workshop both the name and the description if you can provide a suggestion, and alternatively, I'm happy to split into two subcategories if you can provide examples that justify the delineation -- but I do not support cutting it entirely.

> | Developer Tools           | Development                       | Tools and services that support authoring code for software and systems.                                             |

Reviewer 4: Could we say `Development Environments` covers version control systems? 🤔

> | Developer Tools           | Development                       | Tools and services that support authoring code for software and systems.                                             |

Author: Discussed in 9/17 TF1 call.  Will revise name to `Development Environments`.

| Management and Governance | Data Governance                   | Management of the availability, usability, integrity, and security of data.                                          |
| Management and Governance | Disaster Recovery                 | Plans and procedures that ensure systems and services can recover from disruptions.                                  |
| Management and Governance | Endpoint Management               | Tools that configure and secure access to devices.                                                                   |
| Management and Governance | Observability                     | Monitoring, logging, and tracing of data to track the performance and health of systems.                             |
| Management and Governance | Support                           | Assistance and expertise supplied by providers.                                                                      |
| Management and Governance | Other (Management and Governance) | Management and governance services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                           |

> | Media                     | Content Creation                  | Production and sharing of media content.                                                                             |

Author: Alright.  How about just:

```suggestion
| Media                     | Content Creation                  | Production of media content.                                                                             |
```

| Media                     | Gaming                            | Development and consumption of games.                                                                                |
| Media                     | Media Streaming                   | Multimedia delivered and rendered in real-time on devices.                                                           |
| Media                     | Mixed Reality                     | Technologies that blend real-world and computer-generated environments.                                              |
| Media                     | Other (Media)                     | Media services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                               |
| Migration                 | Data Migration                    | Movement of data workloads from one location to another.                                                             |

> | Migration                 | Resource Migration                | Movement of resources from one location to another.                                                                  |

Author: `Data Migration` is meant to cover database.  I had debated splitting Application and Server into separate subcategories, but ultimately I didn't have the service examples to justify it -- so keeping them together under Resource made sense to me.  I'm happy to consider splitting them if you have examples.

| Migration                 | Other (Migration)                 | Migration services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                           |
| Mobile                    | Other (Mobile)                    | All Mobile services.                                                                                                 |

> | Multicloud                | Multicloud Platforms              | Environments that facilitate consumption of services from multiple cloud providers.                                  |

Author: Some design considerations:

1) There does not seem to be a meaningful subcategorization of Multicloud services.  
2) I will propose in a future release that we roll Multicloud as a subcategory into an existing category.  
3) We need a subcategory home for Azure services in order to sustain @flanakin 's objection.
4) We have established a subcategory pattern of `(Category) Platforms` in other categories that I wanted to follow.

For those reasons, I elected to go with the name `Multicloud Platforms`.

> | Multicloud                | Multicloud Platforms              | Environments that facilitate consumption of services from multiple cloud providers.                                  |

Reviewer 4: I'm good with `Multicloud Integration`. It'll also work well if we move this under Management and Governance.

Thinking about our "Platforms" pattern as being anything that spans multiple subcategories, I do think it's fair to say we should probably avoid that if we don't have multiple other subcategories.

The only other categories I would debate would be something more specifically around "Hybrid" and "Edge Computing", but I'm also good with those fitting under "Multicloud Integration". We can break them out based on feedback.

> | Multicloud                | Multicloud Platforms              | Environments that facilitate consumption of services from multiple cloud providers.                                  |

Author: Sounds good. Committing Udam's suggestion.

| Security                  | Secret Management                 | Information used to authenticate users and systems, including secrets, certificates, tokens, and other keys.         |
| Security                  | Security Posture Management       | Tools that help organizations configure, monitor, and improve system security.                                       |
| Security                  | Threat Detection and Response     | Collect and analyze security data to identify and respond to potential security threats and vulnerabilities.         |
| Security                  | Other (Security)                  | Security services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                            |
| Storage                   | Backup Storage                    | Secondary storage to protect against data loss.                                                                      |
| Storage                   | Block Storage                     | High performance, low latency storage that provides random access.                                                   |

> | Storage                   | Data Transfer                     | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                |

Author: I'm open to going with `Storage Transfer`, but including `Offline` would not bring along the Azure examples like Data Box, Import/Export, and Data Share.

> | Storage                   | Data Transfer                     | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                |

Reviewer 4: @udam-f2 Keep in mind this is a SERVICE categorization. Network data transfer would not be a distinct SERVICE, so there's no overlap. That would be surfaced in SKU categorization.

"Storage Transfer" feels ambiguous to me. Would `Storage Data Transfer` be a good compromise that brings clarity and specificity?

> | Storage                   | Data Transfer                     | Secure, high-speed, and offline transfer of stored data from one location to another.                                |

Author: Discussed in 9/16 Maintainer call.  Propose moving to Migration category to represent that this is the primary purpose of the services: to migrate.

| Storage                   | File Storage                      | Scalable, sharable storage for file-based data.                                                                      |
| Storage                   | Object Storage                    | Highly available, durable storage for unstructured data.                                                             |
| Storage                   | Storage Platforms                 | Unified solution that supports multiple storage types.                                                               |
| Storage                   | Other (Storage)                   | Storage services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                             |
| Web                       | Application Frameworks            | Standardized software components used in application development.                                                    |

> | Web                       | Web Platforms                     | Integrated environments that run web applications.                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: If I saw these two category names, I would have a hard time determining what I might find in these subcategories.

Author: I feel good about keeping them separate (components vs platforms); I would absolutely sustain suggestions on name revisions that you feel would make this clearer.

Reviewer 4: +1 to keeping them separate. One is app infra and one is services to augment your apps. Fwiw, I would like to see frameworks broken down more, but Shawn and I agreed this is a good first step for us to get feedback on. That'll especially be important as we consider merging Web and Mobile.

Author: We discussed in the 9/16 Maintainer meeting.  Will strike Application Frameworks.

# Service Subcategory

> The Service Subcategory is the second-highest-level classification of a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  The Service Subcategory is a child of the Service Category, and each Service Subcategory value must have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* should have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 

Author: I'm open to changing the language for sure... but, following a documentation rule I consider a best practice, I would really want to avoid using the word "sub-categorization" (or any variant) to define a column with the word Subcategory in the name.  How about something like:

> The Service Subcategory is a more granular classification of the Service Category of a _service_, based on its core function.

> The Service Subcategory is the second-highest-level classification of a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  The Service Subcategory is a child of the Service Category, and each Service Subcategory value must have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* should have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 

Author: Going with my draft above.

```suggestion
The Service Subcategory is a more granular classification of the Service Category of a [*service*](#glossary:service) based on its core function.  The Service Subcategory (in conjunction with the Service Category) is commonly used for scenarios like analyzing costs across providers and tracking the migration of workloads across fundamentally different architectures.  The Service Subcategory is a child of the Service Category, and each Service Subcategory value must have one and only one Service Category parent. Though a given *service* can have multiple purposes, each *service* should have one and only one Subcategory that best aligns with its primary purpose. 
```

The ServiceSubcategory column MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset and MUST NOT be null. This column is of type String and MUST be one of the allowed values.

## Column ID

ServiceSubcategory

## Display Name

Service Subcategory

## Description

Second-highest-level classification of a *service* based on its core function.

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Column type     | Dimension      |

> | Feature level   | Mandatory      |

Author: We discussed whether to make this column mandatory or optional in today's Member call; results were inconclusive.  Please weigh in with your thoughts!

Reviewer 9: The Service Category is Mandatory, so to be consistent and simple, I would go for the first option:

> Mandatory and allow providers to leave it empty OR use 'Other ($ServiceCategory)'

Reviewer 10: Mandatory

Author: I'm getting a pretty strong sense of Mandatory from folks here (and that's what I think too).  Will leave this open until early next week and try to get more opinions in the meantime!

Reviewer: Just on the description do we need the word 'granular' . To me the Service Category or Service Sub-Category are hierarchial elements and I would say that it provides further classifications but I am not sure of the word 'granular' . Also on non-normative descriptions do we leave must as lowercase or should be in caps?

Reviewer 2: I shouldn't have said "empty or use 'Other ($Service Category)' ". Here I think null and empty are the same and since we're saying null is not allowed, basically providers would have to only use 'Other ($Service Category)' if they don't want to support this right away?

Author: Discussed this point on today's TF1 call. Results remain inconclusive, wanting to balance provider willingness/ability to populate the column vs the practitioner's need to have a fully populated dataset.  

I will also point out that the Service Category column is mandatory, so I feel it would be good to be consistent across these two columns.

Udam's request was for me to check with Tim on this point, which I shall do.

Reviewer 11: I vote for "Mandatory" with "Other" as the default

Reviewer 4: Mandatory non-null is best for practitioners.

For the sanctity of the column, optional non-null would give the most consistent results. (When there's a value, you know it's good.)

If we allow mandatory nullable, practitioners won't know when to expect a value and when not. There's no contract with the provider to get a complete dataset.

If we allow mandatory with "Other" as a fallback, practitioners won't be able to tell if something should be in Other or not. This will create a huge data cleanup effort for all the historical data that doesn't have this until the provider in question implements it. That seems like the worst option 😕

Reviewer 12: We should have this column be either Optional (ie provider may chose to include the column(s) or not), or  Mandatory nullable. Otherwise we create the expectation with practitioners that the column will be be present and/or populated, and when it isn't the FOCUS product will appear to be broken. Providers can communicate whether the column will be present or not, populated or not in their focus data sets in public documentation.

Reviewer 2: I vote for Mandatory nullable simply because it being in the dataset will force practitioners to know they should expect values here and take their feedback to the providers. Optional doesn't do justice for how much value this categorization provides - especially when analyzing cost across multiple clouds.

Author: Mandatory nullable appears to have the strongest acceptance from the group, both here in the comments and in the last couple of FOCUS meetings.  I will change it to that, and we can debate further as necessary.

Author: Discussed in today's Maintainer meeting; grouped decided to make the column Optional, but there is not yet alignment on nullability.  I issued a poll in the FOCUS Slack, and I will resolve this thread with the outcome in the next 24 hours.

Author: After MUCH deliberation, we have aligned on moving forward with Optional.  Committing the below suggestion and resolving.

```suggestion
| Feature level   | Optional      |
```

| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed Values |

Allowed values:

> | Service Category          | Service Subcategory               | Service Subcategory Description                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 13: @salpaysenturus, there are long tables on this PR; I am volunteering to convert these tables to HTML if you think this will help.

Author: @jpradocueva This is why I asked about tables specifically in the editorial guidelines during the member call yesterday.  If you feel that long tables should be in HTML instead of markdown as a matter of course, it would be helpful for that documentation to state as such.

As it stands, I plan to keep the supporting spreadsheet and the PR in sync by making changes in the spreadsheet and using a converter for the markdown.  I can easily switch that to HTML -- but I'd only prefer to do that if it's a standard we're looking to apply across the entire spec.

Author: Resolving this conversation and leaving it markdown.

| ------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | AI and Machine Learning   | Generative AI                     | Creation of content like text, images, and music by learning patterns from existing data.                                                                                                                                                  |

Author: Per [Google's description of Vertex AI](https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai?hl=en) (emphasis mine):

> Vertex AI is a fully-managed, unified AI development platform for building and using **generative AI**.

Thus, I believe / propose it goes into the Subcategory of `Generative AI`.  Do you agree?

> | AI and Machine Learning   | Generative AI                     | Creation of content like text, images, and music by learning patterns from existing data.                                                                                                                                                  |

Author: Added Vertex AI under `Generative AI` in the supporting doc.  Resolving.

> |                           | Language AI                       | Generation of human language, handling tasks like translation, sentiment analysis, and text summarization.                                                                                                                                 |

Author: I think the official name would be [Natural Language Processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing), but it's pretty long.  Does NLP work for you, or is that not well-understood enough in the AI community?

> |                           | Language AI                       | Generation of human language, handling tasks like translation, sentiment analysis, and text summarization.                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: I had chatted with an NLP expert prior to saying this :) but I suggested Natural Language AI just to be more broad. Again, open for any expert opinions.

> |                           | Language AI                       | Generation of human language, handling tasks like translation, sentiment analysis, and text summarization.                                                                                                                                 |

Author: Per the Aug 20 TF1 call, the group aligned on Natural Language Processing, which I changed via a separate commit.  Resolving; please unresolve if you disagree.

| Analytics                 | Analytics Platform                | Collection, processing, and analysis of data to provide insights and support decision-making.                                                                                                                                              |
|                           | Business Intelligence             | Tracking of performance and identification of trends via semantic models, dashboards, reports, and data visualizations.                                                                                                                    |
|                           | Streaming Analytics               | Processing of real-time data streams to detect patterns, trends, and anomalies as they occur.                                                                                                                                              |

> |                           | Data Processing                   | Collection, transformation, and organization of data to make it useful for analysis. Includes tasks like data cleaning, integration, and aggregation.                                                                                      |

Reviewer 2: Do we have a way to clearly define these two without overlapping with Analytics platform?

Author: Is it that you think the descriptions aren't accurate enough, or are you suggesting that we change the Subcategory composition?

Reviewer 2: With Service Description, we wanted to ensure there was no overlap. My questions is do we believe there's clear delineation between the Analytics Platform category and these two? The question behind the question is does using a very general category like Analytics Platform (Or AI Platform as I suggested above) going to confuse when to use the other more specific values?

Author: This is now:

> Unified solution that combines technologies to meet enterprise needs across the end-to-end analytics lifecycle.

How does that feel?

|                           | Other (Analytics)                 | Analytics services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                           |                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Author: Fair enough -- but I would want the description to read the same across all Categories, regardless of whether it has defined Subcategories.  Any suggestions?

> | Business Applications     | Other (Business Applications)     | All Business Applications services.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Author: While I definitely take your point, I think it's okay to leave this as-is for now.  Let me know if you disagree; otherwise, I'll resolve with no action.

|                           |                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> | Compute                   | Virtual Machines                  | Deployment and running of various applications in a flexible computing environment.                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: The description seems off. Are we saying that's how we describe VMs or this is what we do with it? Needs to be more of the former and less of the latter.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something along the lines of "Virtualized compute infrastructure that provides the ability to customize the Operating System and above"?

Author: I suppose this one's tough because it's so ubiquitous in cloud cost/usage, and so it has to be super general.

I'd like to avoid the use of the word "virtual" (or variants) to describe Virtual Machines.  How about:

> Isolated computing environments created by abstracting resources from physical hardware.

Reviewer 2: Not sure how important Isolated here is either.

Author: Okay.  Going with:
```suggestion
| Compute                   | Virtual Machines                  | Computing environments created by abstracting resources from physical hardware.                                                                                                           |
```

> |                           | End User Computing                | Systems and tools that allow non-IT users to create and manage their own applications and data, including desktop virtualization, mobile computing, and self-service analytics.                                                            |

Reviewer 2: Seems too marketing ish.. 
```suggestion
|                           | End User Computing                | Desktop virtualization, mobile computing, and self-service analytics.                                                            |
```

> |                           | Containers                        | Lightweight, portable units that package applications and their dependencies, ensuring they run consistently across different environments.                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be Container Orchestration? Containers seems a bit misleading given that what providers capture in this today is just the orchestration cost?

Author: I guess I hadn't thought of it that way... but I went with this shorter name, given that all three major CSPs capture these costs under a Category that they call `Containers`.  I will raise the topic in tomorrow's TF1 call and see what the team thinks.

Reviewer 2: I get that. I meant more for the description. If I read that description, I would expect to find my cost of containers to be in this category when I'm not going to find the bulk of it there. I get that the name may need to be Containers just because everyone has done that same thing (even though its not accurate). At least in the description, we could try to be accurate.

Author: Very fair point.  Updated via a separate commit to read:

> Automated management of containerized applications.

Author: Resolving this comment.  Please unresolve if the above change doesn't work.

> |                           | Serverless Compute                | Faciliates building and running applications without managing servers. Automatically scales resources based on demand, reducing operational complexity.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Also marketing-ish.
```suggestion
|                           | Serverless Compute                | Facilitates building and running applications without managing servers                                                                                    |
```

> |                           | Quantum                           | Leverages the principles of quantum mechanics to perform complex calculations at high speed.                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: "Quantum computing resources and simulators"

Author: How about:

> Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics to perform certain calculations faster than classical computers.

Reviewer 2: If we follow the way we did ServiceCategory descriptions, we didn't try to get into this level of specificity. This to me is a general feedback across all descriptions. Stay away from purpose. In this case, if that's what you want to go with, then 
> Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics

Author: Sounds good; let's go with that.

```suggestion
|                           | Quantum                           | Resources and simulators that leverage the principles of quantum mechanics.                                                                                                                                               |
```

|                           | Compliance                        | Ensuring that cloud systems and processes adhere to regulatory standards and industry best practices.                                                                                                                                      |
|                           | Data Governance                   | Management of the availability, usability, integrity, and security of data, ensuring that data is accurate, consistent, and used responsibly across the organization.                                                                      |
|                           | Disaster Recovery                 | Plans and procedures that ensure cloud systems can recover quickly from disruptions and minimize downtime.                                                                                                                                 |

> |                           | Observability                     | Monitoring, logging, and tracing of data to track the performance and health of cloud systems and resolve issues proactively.                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | Observability                     | Monitoring, logging, and tracing of data to track the performance and health of systems.                                                                                                              |
```

|                           | Data Transfer                     | Movement of data between systems, locations, or formats via data migration, synchronization, and replication tasks.                                                                                                                        |
|                           | Firewall                          | Monitoring and control of incoming and outgoing network traffic, protecting cloud systems from unauthorized access and cyber threats.                                                                                                      |
|                           | Telecommunications                | Transmission and exchange of voice and video data over significant distances.                                                                                                                                                              |

> |                           | Other (Networking)                | Networking services that do not fall into one of the defined subcategories.                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: Seems way too granular. Not an expert but when I read this compared to compute/db/storage, these seem another level below

Author: Understood.  I will raise the topic in the TF1 call tomorrow.  In the meantime, I invite anyone (including you) to propose an alternative set of groupings.

Reviewer 2: Network Management, Network Security, Content Delivery, Load Balancing, Other

Author: Updated via separate commit to be rolled into the following Subcategories:

> Network Management
> Network Security
> Content Delivery
> Load Balancing
> Data Transfer
> Other (Networking)

Discussed and agreed over Slack.  Resolving.
